# bam_to_fragments

## Description
Converts a SAM/BAM file to a Cellranger fragments file.

## Parameters
```
bam_to_fragments [options]
  -a aligned SAM/BAM file [required]
  -b barcode list file [default = ""]
  -o out file prefix [default = ""]
  -l Number of bases to shift left [default: 4]
  -r Number of bases to shift right [default: -5]
  -d name split delimeter; Ignored if -t is provided. [default: ":"]
  -c barcode field in name; Ignored if -t is provided [default: 7 (0 based)]
  -t barcode tag in SAM file [default ""]
  -q minimum mapping quality to include [default: 0]
  -f only include if all the flags are present [default: 3]
  -F only include if none of the flags are present [default: 3340]
  -v verbose [default: false]
```

`-a`: The input aligned paired end SAM or BAM file. The cell barcode
should be present either in a SAM tag or encoded in the query name
(QNAME) field, see options `\t`, `-d`, and `-c`. [Required].

`-b`: If a barcode list file is provided, only the SAM/BAM entries that
match a barcode are processed. [Default = ""].

`-o`: Output file prefix. [Default = ""].

`-l`: Number of bases to add to the left most alignment location of
each fragment to account for the Tn5 transposase cuts. [Default: 4].

`-r`: Number of bases to add to the right most alignment location of 
each fragment to account for the Tn5 transposase cuts. [Default: -5]. 

`-d`: Used when the cell barcode is encoded as a part of the query name
(QNAME field). Split the QNAME by the specified delimiter. [Default:
":"]. 

`-c`: Used when the cell barcode is encoded as a part of the query name
(QNAME field). Split the QNAME by the delimiter specified by `-d`
and take the barcode as the value in the columns specified by `-c` (0
based). For example, reads that are generated by Illumina sequencers
have a FASTQ names that have 7 fields that are separated by a ":", and
the cell barcode is typically added as the 8th field. [Default: 7].   

`-t`: Used when the cell barcode is present in a SAM entry as a tag. For
example, SAM files generated by CellRanger encodes the error correct
cell barcode in the `CB` tag. If this parameter is set, `-d` and `-c`
flags are ignored. [Default: none]

`-q`: Include only fragments for which both reads have a mapping
quality greater than or equal to the specified value. [Default: 0]

`-f`: Include only fragments for which both reads have all of the
specified flags present. For example, to include paired reads (0x1 or
0b1) and reads that are mapped in proper pair (0x2 or 0b2), specify the
sum of of these flags (1 + 2 = 3). [Default: 3]. 

`-F`: Include only fragments for which both reads have none of the
specified frags present. For example, to exclude PCR duplicates (0x400
or 0b1024) and supplementary alignments (0x800 or 0b2048), specify the
sum of these flags (1024 + 2048 = 3072). [default: 3340].

`-v`: Verbosity flag. Set the flag to print progress and statistics to
standard error. [Default: false].

## Input and output file description
