# It's a scam

It's a scam To Sell Another Single-Cell Analysis Tool (It's a scam) is a
collection of programs to pre-process and quality control single cell
data.

While single cell genomic data is being generated at an ever increasing
rate, the data is often pre-processed with proprietary tools. Born out
of frustration with using these proprietary tools, we developed
its_a_scam for processing and quality control of single cell genomic
data.

its_a_scam is built of top on `gcatlib` and `HTSlib`, and provides tools
for wide range of single cell data processing and quality control.  It's
a scam can be used in conjugation with commonly used open source tools
to build entire single cell analysis pipelines.  Pipelines or scRNA-seq
and scATAC-seq data processing are described here.

## Installation

It's a scam is dependent on `HTSlib` and `gcatlib`.  The installation
procedure for `HTSlib` is described here and `gcatlib` is described
here. 

`its_a_scam` can be obtained from here.

Untar the source files using
```
tar -xf duz.tar.gz
```

Create a build directory with
```
cd its_a_scam
mkdir build 
cd build
```

`its_a_scam` is configured with 
```
../configure
```

The above configuration command works the htslib and gcat lib are
installed in the system pates, and it will install its_a_scam
in the system paths as well. 

If `HTSlib` and `gcatlib` are installed in non-standard directories,
the `configure` script should be executed with:
```
../configure CPPFLAGS='-I/path_to_htslib/include -I/path_to_gcatlib/include' 
LDFLAGS='-L/path_to_htslib/lib -L/path_to_gcatlib/lib'
```

To install its_a_scam in a non-standard directory use:
```
../configure --prefix installation_path
```
Append the `CPPFLAGS` and `LDFLAGS` to the above command if any 
of the dependent libraries are in non-standard paths.

Compile all the programs with:
```
make [-j threads]
```

Finally, install its_a_scam with:
```
make intall
```
This will copy all the programs into `installation_path/bin`.



Of note, the Git repo does not include the `configure` script.
This can be generated by executing `autoreconf -i`.


## Contact
Rishvanth Prabakar: kaliapp@cshl.edu

## License
Copyright (C) 2025 Rishvanth Prabakar

Authors: Rish Prabakar

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option)
any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
